there's actually no difference in
performance if you look at ultimate
bookings of a company or their ultimate
lead conversion rate irrespective of
whether or not use AI it doesn't matter
so today there's no change in Ultimate
conversion rate as a function of using
AI or
not was fortunate enough to spend dinner
with a c cro of a publicly traded
company and I was asking are you using
an aisr and she said yes I am and I said
how's it going and she said you would
not believe the amount of pipeline we've
been able to generate with an AIS SDR
and I asked her how long how long you
been using it and she said n months and
it's great then I asked her how much
business have you closed and she said
zero so it's not to say that AI won't
work it's to say many of us do not know
how to use AI thank you very much
pleasure to be with you all today thank
you very much for
coming it's been about 17 years since I
started as a venture capitalist and in
that time I've been fortunate to work in
the world of software
there's been a tremendous transformation
when Mark benov started Salesforce he
codified the sales Playbook and he talks
about it in his book where there are 115
plays that he run Mark robar who was a
cro at HubSpot he then wrote the next
book the sales acceleration formula
which shared deep insights into the
quota structures and the evolution of
that organization as it went through a
high turn model to a low turn model and
in the subsequent 10 years since then
we in the software world have
instrumented and optimized and measured
every little bit about the way that we
sell
software but today it's all different
and it's all different because the kinds
of software that we sell isn't the same
it's not predictable with Salesforce if
I update a lead from a prospect to a
closed lost it will work the same way
every time but if I use chat GPT or open
AI or a call recording software to
determine what's going on with a lead or
customer Prospect state-ofthe-art says
it'll work somewhere between 80 to 85%
of the time that has radical
implications for the way that people buy
software to give you a sense of this at
Theory we host events with different
software buyers 6 months ago we were
asking them what is the number one
prohibition the thing that inhibits you
from buying AI 6 months ago the answer
was Security today it's Roi people are
struggling to find exactly the value
that AI systems are building
this change is happening within a
macroeconomic backdrop of significant
inflation
so as we were looking at this inflation
I wrote a blog post about two years ago
where I said I would expect software
companies quotas to increase at the rate
of inflation if inflation is going up 4%
per year if the cost of bread is
increasing shouldn't sales quota
shouldn't SES software what we've seen
in the last six or seven months most
notably with clar and house cutting
Salesforce and other major software
products as a way of reducing cost is in
fact the opposite there's been a real
compression in the use of overall
software AI notwithstanding as part of
that AI are should in a new era of of
building or at least thinking about how
to build software companies I was
chatting with this former CEO of a
publicly traded CRM company and we were
I asked him what do you think happens to
sales development rep counts over the
next 12 to 24 months and he said I think
2third of them are out of a job the
entire fundamental unit the AE plus a SC
plus CSM does that model change these
are big and important questions
that we don't really yet have the
answers to we're in the midst of this
transition we hosted an event two uh two
days ago with the cro of heia which is a
unicorn AI business and all he was
previously at scale.ai which is another
AI unicorn and we had three founders on
stage we asked them how are you learning
to sell in this new ecosystem and there
were lots of different answers some
companies were sing Le some were product
Le some companies were selling value
some companies were selling seats some
had Matrix hybrid business
models and the answer is we're figuring
it out the Playbook that we've built
over the last 20 years basically no
longer
applies and we need to reinstrumentation
compes publicly traded and we asked them
about the health of their underlying
business so here I will share with you
the 10 observations from that data so
we'll go through the demographics here
pretty quickly it's about 68% early
stage companies 20 notably 25% of the
companies that replied are
remote most of the respondents actually
have more than 36 months of Runway if we
think about one of the previous surveys
we ran was about Capital efficiency
during the 2020
era most companies were burning
for every new dollar of bookings when
the capital markets retrenched and the
FED raised rate 550 basis
points companies went from burning $5
for every dollar marginal dollar of AR
to burning three now we're seeing that
this and this incredible move to
efficiency in in an even bigger
way I talked to you a little bit about
pricing models so the seat-based pricing
model have been completely dominant for
maybe the first 15 to 20 years of
software
in the infrastructure layer usage based
pricing started to take off and it was
dominant look at snowflakes net dollar
retention at the time of IPO 177 175
171% customer accounts were basically
doubling each year that in addition to
the pressure of the CFO on the seat
based model how much software are we
actually using has pushed even at the
software layer companies to look at
usage based pricing and today it's
actually the the dominant across the
respondent set and we'll look at the net
dollar retention across these pricing
models because there's actually a
statistically significant difference in
the underlying performance of these
businesses as a function of their
pricing model irrespective of the layer
in the
stack terms of who they sell to they
sell to every buyer imaginable so pretty
good representation and it's
predominantly a mid-market group uh 37%
around 10 to 50K so let's dig into the
data let's look what are the 10
observations from
2024 the first question we ask is your
outlook the average Founders outlook on
2024 is 6.7 that's up from 6.1 at the
height in 2022 so Founders are really
excited right there's been a
statistically significant increase in
the overall positivity of Founders
within the ecosystem the biggest
challenge to that Outlook the thing that
damps the Outlook the most is an
increase in sales cycle so why did sales
Cycles increased first we transition
from a physical selling Universe to a
virtual selling universe that elongated
sales Cycles when you have elongated
sales
Cycles it creates Pipeline Supply shocks
what does that mean if my pipe if my Sal
cycle doubles my booking is less than
half and so all of a sudden I have a
massive lack in predictability I don't
know how to spend my money my account
executives are not making money they're
not making commission my business is
destabilized if your sales cycle
lengthens it's it's a a big impact on
cash I was working with with one
company we had a doubling in sales cycle
we tripled burn for that quarter as a
result of a 50 or 60% increase in sales
cycle so no surprise that sales cycle
should ultimately be the biggest driver
of optimism or negativity within the
ecosystem and what there's a 20%
correlate to funding valuation change
this is remarkable because when so when
we started Theory I modeled our funds
and I modeled series A's at about 10 a
half million entry ticket size the idea
was that at the time average series a
tickets to lead around was about 10 11
12 million and as I mentioned before the
FED had to raise rates 550 basis points
now in every other part of the capital
markets If the Fed raises rates Capital
becomes expensive companies raise less
there's less money to go around and not
in startups in fact valuations at series
a ticket sizes have increased 42% in the
last two years so there's been massive
inflation and this was a surprise to me
I thought founders especially the
feedback from Venture capitalists would
have been there a much harder Capital
markets environment us Venture funding
has gone from 8 to 300 over 15 years
it's now falling to about 150 because
81% of the dollars invested in Venture
Capital at the height of the boom came
from non traditional Venture Capital
firms who are all very likely to leave
but what we see within the founder
universe is actually people are pretty
positive on the fund on the fundraising
ecosystem and even as the public market
multiples have collapsed you've seen
snowflake go from about 20 5 to trading
at eight times forward multiple in the
last 18 months private markets have
been Resolute and resolved to keep their
positivity we talked a little bit about
sales Cycles so half of all respondents
irrespective of the segment of the
market that they sell to see an increase
in sales cycle it's most notable within
the
midmarket this is actually something
that came up within that AI dinner that
I mentioned to you a little bit before
we see most AI agentic software
companies people who are selling softare
that replaces labor they either sell at
the Bottom plg Bottoms Up or they sell
at the very
top mid Market is much harder why is
this our rationale is at the office of
the CFO is now tightening the pur
strings eliminating discretionary budget
at the midark at the mid manager level
and so CEO C levels cesos CTO VPS of
engineering who come in and say I really
want to buy this Enterprise software
product are able to bypass procurement
they're able to say we need this this is
the reason why I know what the process
is but we're going to go around it at
the bottom of the market an individual
user still can sign up for a product
with a credit card $9 a month $15 a
month $20 a month both of those parts of
the market remain relatively healthy the
midm market is where it's challenged if
you imagine you have 40% over
provisioning of seats there's a friend
of mine who is part of a cost cutting
exercise at a major publicly traded
company they had signed up a three-year
$100 million infrastructure deal with
less than 3% utilization where did that
come from likely came from a mid manager
and so as a result that lengthened sales
Cycles within the midm market that's
where things are the most challenged and
this is true across all of software and
AI payback periods so how do we Define a
payback period a payback period is a
number of months
required to recoup the cost of customer
acquisition outlay to acquire a customer
we've seen payback periods increase
about 12% on average this is basically
linear it's in line with the increas in
sales
Cycles to offset slower sales cycles and
to offset worse payback periods quotas
actually move linear with them so the
average respondents company increase
quota 14% year-over-year Which is higher
than inflation inflation is been
averaging call it 4% per year and so
you're looking at more than a doubling
of overall inflation in sales
quotas we talked a bit about the FED
raising rates The increased cost of
capital we talked about how Founders are
more optimistic about their fundraising
expectations which is complete surprise
to me you look at the IPO Market
basically non-existent the m&a market
very difficult to sell a business the
cost of capital has gone up throughout
all that Founders remain positive they
expect their valuations to be the same
as in 2023 and the same as in 2022
this data is confounding so we've seen a
lengthening in sales cycle we've
seen buyers be much
more scrutineering about what they buy
but when they do buy there's a higher
qualification rate okay 10% increase in
sales qualified conversion why could
this
be if you have a really big pipeline as
a sales leader and you're not hitting
your number what are you going to do
you're going to redefine your ICP you're
going to redefine the qualification CR
iera and narrow down the funnel really
focus on that core and it may take you
longer to sell to those customers but
they'll likely be much higher quality
and so that's our hypothesis for why
we're seeing a roughly 10% increase uh
on the average and and then the 70 the
second standard the first standard
deviation out which is that line on the
right is actually a 40% increase um in
sales qualified conversion so that means
the top third of all businesses actually
saw a 40% increase in lead conversion
we talked a little bit about the world
of AI and sales AI strs there's a huge
Continuum I can have an a sales co-pilot
I can have a full SDR automation we
asked our respondents how much are you
using AI what are the impacts we ran the
correlation to understand what does that
ultimately do to the sales funnel and
here's the data and so what you would
look at this data and you would say if
you're using AI if you're not using AI
you actually saw a 21% increase in
conversion if you're not sure if you're
using AI which is about 25% of the the
respondent base if you're using
Homegrown Solutions in other words you
built something on chat gbt or anthropic
or others or you bought something off
the shelf there's this distribution of
conversion ratees but if we we ran the
we ran the statistical test there's
actually no difference in performance if
you look at ultimate bookings of a
company or their ultimate lead
conversion rate irrespective of whether
or not use AI it doesn't matter so today
there's no change in Ultimate conversion
rate as a function of using AI or not
going back to that initial point that
dinner that we had with a bunch of
different buyers where they're asking
about Roi this is the reason for their
question they're not seeing the ROI I
was fortunate enough to spend dinner
with a c cro of a publicly traded
company and I was asking are you using
an AIS strr and she said yes I am and I
said how's it going and she said you
would not believe the amount of pipeline
we've been able to generate with an AIS
SDR and I asked her how long how long
have you been using it and she said nine
months and it's great then I asked her
how much business have you closed and
she said
zero so it's not to say that AI won't
work it's to say many of us do not know
how to use
AI I wrote a blog post a couple days ago
it was called the AI shth the shth is a
word that you use in secret in order to
let people pass one of the problems that
we face as investors is trying to
understand what is the unusual what is
the outlier what is exceptional about a
business and try to back those companies
and we've been fortunate enough to back
a few of them and that's what I'm
looking for in AI I'm looking to upload
a whole bunch of customer transcripts
about the way that people use Next
Generation sales software and I don't
want to hear the average I don't want to
hear that Salesforce is great or HubSpot
is great I want to hear the one voice in
the room the one person back there who
is saying I really this next Generation
started because it does these three
things
I'm looking for the inverse of the
average and I don't know how to do that
with an AI very few people actually do
when I wrote that blog post there was a
PhD from a great University who wrote
back and told me exactly what to plug in
but the reality is we're all learning
how to use these tools for the first
time the one of the reasons it's so hard
to sell is there are no experts because
we're inventing it as we go and so to
that point we still don't know how to
use these AI software tools to sell
effectively enough to be able to move
the conversion
metrics this is an interesting chart
which is if you use AI is your growth
rate meaningfully faster than you
thought it would be year-over-year and
the answer again is
No so there's no impact in overall
growth rate change as a function of
using AI all of the respondent
populations are effectively
identical this next
chart is how much so the question we
asked is
how much did you
grow how efficient were you in that
growth and then we asked respondents to
estimate how much more efficient did AI
make
you so you have this one outlier on the
top where one one person said it makes
us about uh 5x more efficient most
people were about TW somewhere between
25 to 75% more efficient as a result of
that that's the y axis that's the
vertical axis on the x-axis we
looked at how
much more efficient they were
year-over-year and those boxes are
between -4 and 4% so there's a dominant
belief within the ecosystem that AI is
making these processes much more
efficient and it's not showing up in the
data so this was the biggest conclusion
for me and this has actually been
independently substantiated by others
which is if you look at so there's
pricing Theory I love pricing Theory
love writing about it there's an
academic paper from the University of
Minnesota a brilliant researcher ran
Monte Carlos simulations on how to
optimize pricing structures the dominant
pricing structure in both b2c and b2v
applications is a cell phone plan
there's a base number of minutes that
you get for a particular price you might
buy 500 extra minutes at say a cent per
minute and then if you want any
additional minutes above that you might
pay 2 and. half cents for that minute
that's called a three-part
tariff that in game theory is actually
the most efficient most effective
pricing strategy whether or not you're
an incumbent whether you're an up
incomer whether the market is expanding
or not and for a long time this is what
many SAS companies did they had a base
platform fee tente platform fee and then
you charge for users and they deployed a
two-part tariff the idea was that the
base platform fee would be used to
offset some meaningful fraction of the
initial cost of customer acquisition 40
60 70% and then the contribution margin
of that individual contract was
generated through the
seats as I mentioned before there's been
a broad shift towards usage based
pricing or some combination thereof and
that's happened over the last five years
if we look at the net dollar retention
change so how much if customers spent
$100 today last year the customer spent
$100 last year how much are they
spending with us this year top quartile
used to be around 130% now it's about
120% so if you look at net dollar
retention if you're using a combination
pricing model in other words seats plus
usage 3x the growth in that dollar
retention as as somebody who's using any
other form of pricing so that three-part
tariff that theory that was created in
2012 or 2013 of the University of
Minnesota is actually true we we see it
in the data and so at that event last
night or two nights ago where we were
talking
about we were talking about different
pricing models for AI we asked a number
of people about a third of the people
are charging for seats about another
third of the people are charging for
usage and then this the cro Dave who I
mentioned before he raised his hand and
asked how many people are charging for
value and not a single person raised
their hand but this is the idea the idea
with the three-part tariff is that
you're able to charge for Value you
generate $10 million worth of marginal
Roi and you're able to capture 15 maybe
20 maybe 25% of it and the the
combination pricing strategy of a base
platform fee
plus a usage based component is what's
driving that in the market
today so overall terms of what we've
noticed Founders are more positive today
than in 2022 despite the fact that sales
Cycles are about 12% longer that
lengthening sales cycle increases the
payback period to offset that payback
period startup Founders and CEOs have
increased quotas
linearly and in addition as a result of
focusing the ICP all the math basically
works and we're back to where we were 2
years ago although the quotas are
higher AI today has no impact on
conversion rate has no impact on ARR
growth even though people who buy AI
perceive it as a meaningful contributor
to their overall efficiency gains and
then the last data point is if you're
going to be thinking about changing your
pricing model particularly in this new
era it's really important to think about
how you can create a hybrid or Matrix
kind of pricing model because you'll
growth you'll have six percentage points
more of net dollar retention and as
Einstein said compounding interest is
the most valuable force in the world and
so if you can have those 6% why wouldn't
you thank you very much for your time
and attention I appreciate it have a
wonderful rest of your conference